.TH IB 1 "June 2026" "gib 0.3.6" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
ib \- operator-focused Infoblox DNS CLI
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ib
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] [\fICOMMAND\fR] [\fIARGS\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B ib
is a command line interface for managing Infoblox DNS and IPAM records from the shell.
It supports profile setup, encrypted credentials, DNS view and zone context,
record workflows, IPAM network lookup, cache inspection, next available IP
lookup, optional write-action audit logging, and shell completion.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B ib config
Manage profiles, completion, and cache data.
.TP
.B ib dns
Manage DNS views, zones, records, and searches.
.TP
.B ib net
Manage IPAM network views, IPv4 networks and containers, address details, and
next available IP lookups.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-v, \-\-version
Print the version number and AEST build date.
.TP
.B \-h, \-\-help
Show command help.
.TP
.B \-o, \-\-output table|json|csv
Select output format.
.TP
.B \-\-debug
Print timestamped command, WAPI, and cache timing diagnostics to stderr.
Stdout remains reserved for normal table, JSON, or CSV output.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
.B ib
Print top-level usage and end with the current profile, DNS view, and DNS zone
context.
.TP
.B ib -v
Print the version number and AEST build date.
.TP
.B ib config new --default
Create a default Infoblox profile and optionally enable audit logging.
.TP
.B ib config use PROFILE
Set the local default profile override. PROFILE may be local or a merged Linux
global profile from /etc/ib/config.
.TP
.B ib config list
List merged local and global profiles. The scope column shows whether each
profile comes from local config or /etc/ib/config.
.TP
.B sudo ib config new --global-config shared
Create a Linux global profile under /etc/ib for a shared group. Global profile
creation requires root.
.TP
.B sudo ib config edit --global-config shared
Edit a Linux global profile under /etc/ib. Global profile edits require root.
Plain ib config edit follows the selected profile scope, so a current global
default edits /etc/ib/config and warns on permission errors.
.TP
.B ib dns list
List records in the current DNS context. Current-context footers mark global
profiles with (global).
Use --type ns to list nameserver records. Table output labels NS rows as
NS-AUTH for authoritative zone nameservers or NS-DELEGATION for child-zone
delegation nameservers; filters still use ns.
Larger IPv4 reverse CIDR scopes can include matching child reverse zones.
.TP
.B ib dns search app
Search records by name, value, or comment.
.TP
.B ib dns search ben-dr-vss.net.latrobe.edu.au
Infer the matching forward zone from a complete FQDN keyword; global search
still scans all zones but also matches the relative owner in that forward zone.
.TP
.B ib dns create ptr 192.0.2.10 app.example.com
Create a PTR record by IP address. The reverse zone is discovered automatically
unless an explicit zone override is supplied.
.TP
.B ib net list prod --network-view default
List IPv4 networks and containers matching prod in the default IPAM network view.
Default output shows network, type, and comment columns.
Table output color-codes CIDR size and network/container type values.
Covered child CIDRs are not synthesized unless Infoblox returns them as objects.
Existing cache is returned immediately; add --refresh to wait for fresh WAPI data.
.TP
.B ib net search 10.129.0.0/16
Search merged unscoped and per-view IPAM CIDRs and include related parent and
child networks or containers in the same network view. Covered child CIDRs are
not synthesized unless Infoblox returns them as objects.
Existing cache is returned immediately; add --refresh to wait for fresh WAPI data.
.TP
.B ib net address 192.0.2.10 --network-view default
Show IPAM address details for 192.0.2.10.
.TP
.B ib net next-ip 192.0.2.0/24 -n 3
Find available IPv4 addresses in a network or container.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.ib/config
Local profile configuration with encrypted password tokens.
.TP
.I ~/.ib/key
Unix key file for legacy \fBenc:v1\fR profile password tokens. Native Windows
builds write new password tokens with user-scope DPAPI instead.
.TP
.I ~/.ib/cache.badger
Local DNS/IPAM cache directory.
.TP
.I ~/.ib/audit.jsonl
Default local JSON Lines audit log file when file audit logging is enabled.
.TP
.I /etc/ib/config
Linux global profile configuration. Normal commands merge this file with local
config; local profiles and metadata override matching global names. Missing or
unreadable global config is skipped silently.
.TP
.I /etc/ib/key
Linux global key file for shared encrypted profile password tokens.
.TP
.I /etc/ib/cache.badger
Linux global DNS/IPAM cache directory.
.TP
.I /etc/ib/audit.jsonl
Default Linux global JSON Lines audit log file when file audit logging is enabled.
.SH AUDIT LOGGING
Audit logging is disabled by default and can be enabled during
.B ib config new
or
.B ib config edit .
Successful DNS record create/edit/delete, DNS zone create/delete, PTR side
effects, and config profile create/edit/delete actions are logged. Read, list,
search, cache, and completion operations are not logged. Linux supports file and
syslog sinks; Windows supports Windows Event Log and file sinks. File logs use
one JSON object per line and redact password, key, credential, token, and secret
fields. Selecting the file sink warns about writable log-file risk, allows
returning to method selection, and tests that the path can be opened for
writing before saving. Audit sink failures print a warning and do not fail the
completed write.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B IB_SEARCH_DEBUG=1
Print legacy per-zone DNS search cache sources to stderr. Prefer
.B \-\-debug
for broader command, WAPI, and cache timing diagnostics. Sources include fresh
cache, stale cache, serial-valid cache, and allrecords.
.SH SEE ALSO
.B ib --help
and
.B ib config completion bash
for live command help and shell completion. On Windows, run
.B ib config completion windows
to install PowerShell completion for the current user.
